# Technology : API

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Key Requirements 
- An API is a developers UI 
- Should make use of web standards where applicable 
- Should be able to explore via a browser
- Simple , intuitive , consistent to make adoption easier 

## Use RESTful URLs and actions
- The key principles of REST involve separating your API into logical resources. These resources are manipulated using HTTP requests where the method (GET, POST, PUT, PATCH, DELETE) has specific meaning.
- **But what can I make a resource?** Well, these should be nouns that make sense from the perspective of the API consumer, not verbs. To be clear: a noun is a thing, a verb is what you do to it
- **Watch out though**: Although your internal models may map neatly to resources, it isn't necessarily a one-to-one mapping. The key here is to not leak irrelevant implementation details out to your API! Your API resources need to make sense from the perspective of the API consumer
- Example of CRUD Operations 
  - GET /tickets - Retrieves a list of tickets
  - GET /tickets/12 - Retrieves a specific ticket
  - POST /tickets - Creates a new ticket
  - PUT /tickets/12 - Updates ticket #12
  - PATCH /tickets/12 - Partially updates ticket #12
  - DELETE /tickets/12 - Deletes ticket #12
- The great thing about REST is that you're leveraging existing HTTP methods to implement significant functionality on just a single /tickets endpoint.
- Use a plural name as endpoint 
- **embed** can be used to fetch details not related to the endpoint 
  - Kind of breaks the rules but makes the API much cleaner 
- Design choices to have customer in mind for ease of integration 
- Documentation -
  - Easily found and publicly assessed
  - Complete reuest response cycles 
- Versioning - Needs to be in the URL ( atleast major version ) and minor version possibly in the header 
- filtering, sorting & searching - Keep the base URL clean and use URL params to implement these 
- Use a fields query parameter that takes a comma separated list of fields to include
  - GET /tickets?fields=id,subject,updated_at&state=open&sort=-updated_at
- In case of a POST that resulted in a creation, use a HTTP 201 status code and include a Location header that points to the URL of the new resource
- XML is not a great choice for an API. It's verbose, it's hard to parse, it's hard to read, its data model isn't compatible with how most programming languages model data
- For a JSON based API, you should stick to JSON for API input also.
- To prevent abuse, it is standard practice to add some sort of rate limiting to an API
- At a minimum, include the following headers:
  - X-Rate-Limit-Limit - The number of allowed requests in the current period
  - X-Rate-Limit-Remaining - The number of remaining requests in the current period
  - X-Rate-Limit-Reset - The number of seconds left in the current period
- A RESTful API should be stateless. This means that request authentication should not depend on cookies or sessions. Instead, each request should come with some sort authentication credentials
- HTTP provides a built-in caching framework! All you have to do is include some additional outbound response headers and do a little validation when you receive some inbound request headers
- Caching -
  - ETag: When generating a response, include a HTTP header ETag containing a hash or checksum of the representation. This value should     change whenever the output representation changes. Now, if an inbound HTTP requests contains a If-None-Match header with a matching     ETag value, the API should return a 304 Not Modified status code instead of the output representation of the resource.
  - Last-Modified: This basically works like to ETag, except that it uses timestamps. The response header Last-Modified contains a           timestamp in RFC 1123 format which is validated against If-Modified-Since. Note that the HTTP spec has had 3 different acceptable       date formats and the server should be prepared to accept any one of them.
- Errors 
  - Just like an HTML error page shows a useful error message to a visitor, an API should provide a useful error message in a known         consumable format. The representation of an error should be no different than the representation of any resource, just with its own     set of fields
  - The API should always return sensible HTTP status codes. API errors typically break down into 2 types: 400 series status codes for       client issues & 500 series status codes for server issues

**Reference**
[Blog Post](https://www.vinaysahni.com/best-practices-for-a-pragmatic-restful-api)
